## Personal Note

ThreeFold Dubai and TFTech (our technology company) have put a lot of money and time into creating the technology and current version of the ThreeFold Grid. We are grateful for the support of the community, especially the farmers and, of course, our investors in TFTech who made it all possible.

We are personally proud of how far we have come and the capabilities of the technology stack created.

The last year has been quite challenging: our token price fell hard and our own sources of funding became much more limited. This didn’t allow us to execute fully on the plan we had in mind. We had to scale back a little and we have decided to focus fully on the further development of technology rather than commercialization or promotion, for which we don’t have the funds right now.

We got a lot of good feedback from the community – thank you – but of course also some complaints. Some people in the community believe that our system is still too centralized, which we do agree with. What is more worrisome is that some believe that maybe we don't have the best intentions at heart and that saddens us to hear this. The ThreeFold core team tries to be as transparent and fair as possible and is doing all it can to support the community. Our company ONLY got its funding from our investors, we did not sell any tokens.

One of our lowlights was around a solution provider called Foldit. While we are delighted that a community member created a User Interface on top of the TFGrid, we have been unable to help bring it alive. ThreeFold could not execute the Voting Request because we were lacking information and there were issues around legal responsibilities. We asked Foldit for more info to re-submit the vote. All we're asking for is clear information to be shared with the community, after which the DAO can decide. Despite investing a lot of time, we still haven't found an immediate solution. This issue has sparked intense debates.

To resolve the issues mentioned above, we believe that the following path is in the best interest of the community:

1. Keep on innovating (e.g. we add GPU support for AI) in version 3.11.
2. Deliver our version 3.12, which will be all focussed on decentralization and simplification.
3. Carry on our parallel work on version 4.0, which has great new features for stabilizing our token as well as ultimate scalability, flexibility and new opportunities for our community.
4. Establish ThreeFold Cloud, which will all be focussed on commercialization for our TFGrid 4.0.
5. Conclude on our fundraising for TFTech and the new ThreeFold Cloud.

## TFGrid 3.12 Is a Huge Decentralization Upgrade

* Daily Minting on Chain
  * We implement the minting as a script which is run on (e.g.) 9 guardian nodes. It aims to achieve a consensus (log the minting in the chain). If the consensus is passed, then a multisignature account creates the tokens (from the 9 guardians). We also need to make sure double-spending is never possible.
* Farmers get more income:
  * Those changes lead to a lot of extra income for farmers.
  * Farmers can add extra reward for CU/SU (per node).
    1. Since a farm may have varying quality of CU/SU for different nodes, this parameter is set for each node.
  * Farmers can add extra reward for Dedicated Nodes (per node).
    1. Same logic as above.
  * Farmers can define prices for NU and IP Addresses (per farm).
    1. This is not an extra. The price is 100% defined by each farmer for their farm.
  * Farmers make money on utilization
  * Note: Default prices would be decided by the DAO.
* Farmers Information & Reputation Management:
  * Farmers can put a link in TFChain to describe their farm (e.g. leading to a website page or the like). This link is not the TFChain content itself, but a way for the farmers to present their farms.
  * Farmers can specify their bandwidth, if their farm is in a quality datacenter, and more, as structured info in TFChain. The Farmerbot could also check this information (bandwidth), as the TFChain can not immediately validate this information.
  * Stakers need to select the Farmers they want to support and help.
  * Farmers make money on staking support from their own communities or their own TFT.
    1. More information below. Staking on farms has 10% for utilization and 20% of this 10% goes to the Farmer (i.e. 2%).
* Introduction of Staking on Validators and Farms:
  * Use Staking for TF Farms and TF Validators to define voting power, as well as distribute rewards for the community that is showing support for ThreeFold.
    1. This means that current voting power based on farm size is removed. Farmed tokens for farms are staked automatically. A farmer needs to un-stake to get the tokens. This might only happen after the lock.
* We remove features which cause complications and confusion:
  * The solution provider & sales channel features will be removed. (More on this below.)
  * The certified farmer concept is no longer needed, because farmers can define their own additional reward income. This includes gold certified farming.
    1. Farmers can advertise their uptimes on their website. Uptime is also available on the TF Dashboard. High uptime farms would be seen as more reliable (e.g. the 99.8% required previously for certified farms).
    2. To discuss: add a feature in the TF Dashboard for users to see different uptime levels (e.g. past month, past 3 months, past 12 months, since the start of the farm, etc.).

## Stabilization of our Token Price

The token price should be the reflection of our traction of the grid, which isn’t the case today because of the following:

* We keep on generating more TFT (supply) than there is current demand (e.g. for staking & utilization).
* Too many farmers need to sell their TFT to pay for their expenses,
so we keep on having too much sales pressure.
* There is no staking model, which doesn’t allow the community to express their support.
* We don’t have enough promotion & communication budget yet.
* We don’t have enough commercial solution providers pushing utilization of the grid.

What is happening over the next months is important to resolve this:

* As presented in this document:
  * The farming model will be changed.
  * The staking model will be introduced.
* There will be a lot less of TFT farming (minting) starting from Zero-OS 4.0, as TFT will become the reserve currency while CHI will be the new currency for farming.
* ThreeFold Grid 4.0 introduces the concept of Regional Internets, which will drive TFT utilization to a large extent.
* Large TFGrid use cases will be announced within 6 months (AYA, some large Communities, and more).
* ThreeFold Cloud will be launched. This might have some very serious impact within 1 year as this leads to commercial offerings.
* Funding for ThreeFold Cloud and TFTech will allow grants to decentralized Development & Promotion Projects (end Q3).

## SIMPLICITY AND DECENTRALIZATION IS KEY

### DECENTRALIZED DEVELOPMENT & PROMOTION

Towards TFGrid 4.0, the development and promotion of the TFGrid will happen in a fully decentralized way. Our aim is to use a platform like Gitcoin (or some alternative).

By changing to full decentralization, the pace at which we can develop will be aligned with funding coming in from the TFGrid utilization or the community if they want to have certain features or changes. We are looking to streamline the grants and the roadmap management in a completely decentralized manner in line with funding received as well as requirements from the community.

A [Quadratic Funding](https://cointelegraph.com/explained/quadratic-funding-the-future-of-crowdfunding-explained) mechanism will be used to help fair distribution of funding. 10% of all TFGrid revenue goes in the TF Treasury. The TFChain DAO decides how to fund the development or promotion projects by using the TFChain Treasury funds.

The budget granted to bring us to version 3.12 is contributed by ThreeFold Cloud and will be at least 70k USD.

ThreeFold Cloud and TFTech will continue to be granters for promotion and development of features of the TFGrid. We expect that other parties will follow (we already know some). We are looking for a team who wants to manage and support this process and will be paid from this platform as well.

### DECENTRALIZATION: ROLL OUT OUR LONG EXPECTED VALIDATOR AND STAKING STRATEGY

We want to roll out and improve our validator and staking strategy.

Staking can happen on

* ThreeFold Guardian Validators
* ThreeFold Farms

Staking is important for the following reasons:

* You show your support for a farmer or a guardian, because you give them your vote of confidence.
* You show your support for the TFGrid by locking in value and receiving rewards for doing so.

Principles

* 9 to 33 validators are operated by ThreeFold Guardians. We call them Guardian Validators.
  * As block creators are elected based on staking, it is not possible to enforce a lower bound. These numbers (9 to 33) would need to be discussed and approved.
* Every TFT token holder can stake their tokens on Guardian Validator(s) or on the Farm(s) of their choice.
* The minimum number of TFT per validator is 2,000,000 TFT.
* The Guardians and Farmers get votes on the TFChain DAO in relation to the weight of the amount of staked tokens on their Validator or Farm.
* A form of punishment (e.g. slashing) should be implemented in the cases where the authority misbehaves. The incites validators to be constantly effective and will allow stakers to support trusted parties (e.g. validators with few or no failures)
  * Potential slashing events:
    * Failure to participate promptly in minting.
    * Normal PoS slashing events.

The initial rewards for the staking tokens on a Guardian Validator are

* 10% of TFT that is used for utilization of the grid.
* A commission of 20% on above 10% goes to the Validator Operator = The Guardian.

The initial rewards for the staking tokens on a ThreeFold Farm are the following:

* 10% of TFT is used for utilization of the grid.
* A commission of 20% of the 10% (i.e. 2%) goes to the 3Nodes Operator, i.e. the Farmer.
This is only for the tokens that are staked, the farmer gets other rewards in relation to utilization.

### DECENTRALIZATION: MORE POWER AND ADDITIONAL REWARDS TO THE FARMERS

* Farmers can define custom pricing:
  * The idea is to allow a farmer to receive additional rewards for CU/SU. The rewards would be distributed as follows:
    1. 70% goes directly to the farmer.
    2. 20% goes to the staking reward on validators and farms.
    3. 10% goes to the TF Treasury.
* Farmers get more income (NEW FEATURE)
  * Farmers receive 20% on tokens utilization of their node for CU/SU (TFT spent)
  * Farmers receive another 10% on tokens utilization for tokens as staked on their own farm.
  * Farmers can define additional reward for CU/SU (done per farm)
  * Farmers can define price for their GPU or other special requirement (done per 3Node)
  * Farmers can define price for NU and IP Addresses (done per farm)
  * All extra income for farmers is not linked to burning.
* Ability to help solution providers:
  * Farmers can give discounts on their additional rewards as specified in this section to selected accounts (e.g. solution providers). Note that this does not allow a farmer to lock down their farm to users. It’s only a discount on the farmer’s additional rewards.
* Simpler for farmers to utilize their own nodes
  * Farmers who reserve their own capacity won't pay more TFT than they farm with the same capacity.
* Farmers Information
  * Farmers can put a link to describe their farm (i.e. a link to their website page or the like).
  * Farmers can specify information such as bandwidth, uptime, quality datacenter, etc.

### TOKENOMICS 3.12

The TFGrid will be compatible with two tokenomics policies. The new tokenomics policy will be 100% backward compatible with the currently used farming reward model. This means that farmers would keep on earning the exact same amount of tokens if they choose not to upgrade to the variable model.

#### FIXED FARMING POLICY

##### Farming

* For all existing farms, the rewards are the same as today. We call this the Fixed Farming reward.
* For every node in the farm, we calculate the amount of CU and SU.
* We also check the amount of NU (public network traffic) and IP (public IPv4) used on the nodes by workloads.
* The uptime over the period is calculated based on the uptime reports in the chain.
* The farming parameters get fetched from the chain. These parameters depend on the certification of the node (certified or not) and the certification of the farm (gold or regular), and are then used to calculate the total maximum payout for the period.
* If the farm is a gold certified farm, the node gets tokens from minting if it has at least 99.80% uptime in the period. For non gold certified farms, the payout is scaled proportional to the node uptime percentage (e.g. 50% uptime -> 50% of the total payout).

##### Utilization CU/SU

* 10% goes to the stakers on validators.
* 40% goes to the TF treasury.
* 50% goes to burning. This is more than in version 3.11 and it should largely compensate for minting.

##### Utilization Extras

* Utilization extras will not be possible.

#### VARIABLE POLICY (NEW)

Farms can decide to upgrade to Variable Policy, we highly recommend farmers do so.

##### Farming

* New tokens (TFT or CHI for v4.0) are only the result of CU/SU farming.
* Rewards are always variable in line to parameters as specified on TFChain.
* Rewards are automatically staked on the 3Node.
* There is a Farmer Staking lockup period of 1 year or 30% utilization, whichever comes first.

##### Utilization CU/SU

* 20% goes to farmers for SU/CU utilization.
* 10% goes to the stakers on validators.
* 10% goes to the stakers on farms (for utilization of that farm).
* 10% goes to the TF treasury.
* 50% goes to burning. This is more than in 3.11 and should largely compensate for minting.

##### Utilization Extras

As can be defined by the farmers, this represents an extra source of income:

* 70% goes to the farmer for the utilization extras
  * Extra rewards for CU/SU (per node)
  * Extra rewards for Dedicated Nodes (per node)
  * Define prices for NU and IP Addresses (per farm)
* 10% goes to stakers on validators.
* 10% goes to stakers on farms (for utilization of that farm).
* 10% goes to the TF treasury.

#### ASSETS ON TFCHAIN (Future release)

An amazing idea has been brought forward by Lee in [this TF Forum post](https://forum.threefold.io/t/tft-locked-value-during-deployment/3675/28), concerning assets on TFChain. While this assets on TFChain project would not be doable within a short timeframe (thus for TFGrid 3.12), we want to include it in this document as it goes in line with the philosophy elaborated in this document, namely improving the ThreeFold tokenomics and decentralization of the project.

### DECENTRALIZATION: MORE FLEXIBILITY FOR THE SOLUTION PROVIDERS

In TFGrid 3.12, we remove the existing model and process for the solution providers. Solution providers on their own will be able to add extra fees to deployments or partner with farmers.

In brief, solution providers can buy capacity in bulk and even make deals with selected farmers to get the best price possible. The amount of TFT staked on guardian validators or TF Farms provide additional discounts.

The aim is to make the cost of purchasing capacity as cost effective as possible to allow the solution providers to define their own sales price of their solutions and have healthy margins.

The solution providers who want to co-promote with ThreeFold (be endorsed by ThreeFold) will need to pass an approval process. See the next section for more information on this.

#### Solution Providers ThreeFold Endorsement Program

The solution providers who want to be endorsed by ThreeFold (listing on website, co-promotion, etc.) need to make sure that the following requirements are covered:

* They need to have their own Terms and Conditions (T&C).
* Their users need to accept their own Terms and Conditions as well as the Generic TFGrid T&C.
* They need to be very specific about if their technology is open source or not and what the licenses are.
* They need to have a clear description of what their users can expect from a support perspective.
* Their users need to understand that ThreeFold is not responsible for delivering support on the solutions from the solution provider. ThreeFold also cannot take any liability for any malfunctioning.

ThreeFold will not promote solutions which:

* Damage the planet or the people on the planet.
* Are linked to gambling, adult entertainment, hatred, etc. This will need to be further defined.

Note that the Solution Providers ThreeFold Endorsement Program would not lead to more revenues for the approved solution providers. It is an association between ThreeFold and the approved solution providers to provide additional visibility to their solutions and to expand ThreeFold’s official partnerships.

### DECENTRALIZATION: RE-SOLIDIFY THE DAO

The parameters on-chain are all managed by the TFCHAIN DAO:

* Pricing
  * CU/SU basic sales prices are currently 7.20 USD and 3.60 USD per month respectively. ([Source](https://www.manual.grid.tf/cloud/cloudunits_pricing.html))
  * Discount for dedicated nodes. Currently, this discount is 50%.
  * Discount in line with ownership of TFT as staked on validators of guardians. The discount is thus no longer linked to the TFTs contained within the user’s wallet. This allows for more security too, since people need to stake if they want discounts. To be clear, this form of discount replaces the current model with discounts based on the TFT within one’s wallet.
  * The DAO would decide on default prices for CU/SU/NU, as well as IP addresses and dedicated nodes, in order to allow a plug-n-play experience for farmers.
* Validator Benefits
  * Percentage of revenues with 10% for the stakers
* Farming Reward Parameters
  * TFT reward per CU/SU for farmers
  * The parameters for tokenomics as specified above
* Farming Lockup Parameters:
  * There is either a minimum utilization threshold in percentage or a minimum number of months before minting gets released:
    * Both are currently set to 0 for the fixed reward farmers.
    * The parameters will be of one year or a minimum of 30% utilization for the new 3Nodes starting with version 3.12. This means that the tokens which are farmed are locked for one year unless they get a utilization threshold of 30% or more.
    * The tokens that are farmed but not released count as being staked on the farm.
  * The cutoff date for fixed farming reward, for now, is on Dec 30, 2024.
    * Existing farmers will have the choice to opt in or not into the new variable rewards scheme. This means that no new nodes would be eligible for fixed rewards after this date.
* Voting Parameters:
  * Percentage of votes needed
  * Minimum voting period
  * Maximum voting period
* Decentralized Promotion and Development
  * Percentage of revenue going to TF Treasury, which is at 10% initially.
* Software versions on TFGrid and TFChain
  * Will support rolling upgrade, means first upgrade some farms if good more (Q1 2024)
* TFT generation protection
  * Define TFT vs Milligram of Gold Price
  * Maximum minting of TFT per CU/SU per day is defined in relation to the milligram of gold price, initially this will be 0.0689 USD per milligram (As of the date: 02/08/23, 13:20:01 BST, [Source](https://www.gold.org/goldhub/data/gold-prices)) .This is a special parameter and it can only be changed with +90% voted, and the vote will need a one month voting period minimum. This ensures that the quantity of TFT produced is healthy for the tokenomics.

DAO VOTES

* Change of any of the parameters as defined above.
* Acceptance of suggested grants to selected development or promotion projects as defined on platforms like Gitcoin.
* Acceptance/Deactivation of Guardians. This vote can be concerning one or many guardians.
* Voting done by Farmers and Guardians, Voting Power in relation to the number of TFT staked on the Validators or Farms.
* Each vote is linked to forum posts or other website/wiki pages.

### DECENTRALIZATION: RE-DEFINE GUARDIANS

The TFGrid requires a minimum and a maximum of 9 and 33 guardians respectively. There will be a public election process on the TF Forum where all candidate guardians can put forward their candidacy. Guardians can be a group of people and this is highly recommended as it makes it easier for them to execute their duties. This means that the guardian concept should allow a guardian to be owned by more than one person. This would be coupled with a consensus concept and would be used (e.g.) for token retrieval and more.

These guardians will run a blockchain node and execute specific functions for the TFGrid. This means that block creators are selected by code, and not by humans. Authorities will thus be selected solely on the total stake they have on the blockchain.

Requirements:

* To have good knowledge of Linux and Docker to allow you to deploy
and upgrade your validator starting from code.
* To be available at least 2 hours a week, but this will be more at the beginning.
* To be willing to participate in the TF forum and coordinate with Coders.
* To feel aIigned with our values of planet and people first.
* To be willing to look at open issues at least 5 times a week (there is chat and email notification).
* To choose a backup person who can help you when needed (sick days, holidays, etc.).
* To complete your candidacy on our forum and to fill in your profile and share your motivation.
* To get at least 3 people from the community to endorse your skills and motivation.

Guardians Manage the Voting process

* Create a vote for the DAO (always linked to a concrete action in code for TFChain): 10% of the guardians need to agree.
* Cancel a vote: 50% of the guardians need to agree.

The Guardians get the following in return:

* Eternal recognition from the ThreeFold Community. (-:
* 20% of all margin as created on their validator.

### SIMPLIFY THE GRID

The current format of the TF DAO doesn’t seem to work, nor does the solution provider feature. We have been losing a lot of cycles around this and it created a lot of unhappiness in the community.

We want to remove the Solution Provider feature and replace it with more simple measurements who will also achieve what we wanted to do, as discussed in the present document. As discussed, the DAO also gets simplified and becomes much more specific.

## Requirements and Next Steps

* We need to find 9 Guardians. We will use the TF Forum for this.
* We need approval on this plan on the TF Forum in less than one week.
* We will do one generic DAO vote concerning the current plan on the current chain.
* This needs to happen in less than 2 weeks.
* We need to have confirmation on the required budget from TFCloud and/or TFChain or other parties to make TFGrid 3.12 happen.
* We need to finish the development during the summer.

## Technical Details

### Zero-OS 4.0

Zero-OS is our new version of Zero-OS for TFGrid 4.0 and TFGrid 3.12:

* Will be compatible with TFChain 3.x as well as TFChain 4.0 and 3Bot peer-to-peer mode, as we prepare Zero-OS 4.0 for TFGrid 4.0
* Latest Jan 2024, but probably earlier, Zero-OS 4.0 will be upgraded on all Nodes.
* Once Zero-OS 4.0 is active, all new Farms will be part of a Regional Internet using CHI as a local currency, which is backed by TFT which in turn will be our reserve currency.
* Farmers on TFGrid 3.x will have the choice to stay on TFChain 3.x or move to a regional internet with TFChain 4.x.

### Multi User Owned Validators

I think it's good to have a concept where many people together can own a validator and where rules can be set on how tokens can be taken out of the rewards. We would rather have less validators that are properly managed than many validators poorly managed.

### Minting Process

The minting process would include a minting script tool which would run on the guardian nodes where consensus is achieved. This script would log the minting on the TFChain. If the minting is correct, then multisignature accounts from the nine guardians create the money. We also need to make sure that double-spending is never possible.

## Feedback and Questions

Any member of the ThreeFold community is invited to share feedback and ask questions concerning this document. You can either write a comment directly on this document, or discuss it in this [ThreeFold Forum post](https://forum.threefold.io/t/3-12-proposal-and-discussion/4031).
